README.md, before:

# DQAstats

<!-- badges: start -->
[![R CMD Check via {tic}](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/workflows/R%20CMD%20Check%20via%20{tic}/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/actions)
[![linting](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/workflows/lint/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/actions)
[![test-coverage](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/workflows/test-coverage/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/actions)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/miracum/dqa-dqastats/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/miracum/dqa-dqastats)
[![pipeline status](https://gitlab.miracum.org/miracum/dqa/dqastats/badges/master/pipeline.svg)](https://gitlab.miracum.org/miracum/dqa/dqastats/commits/master)
[![coverage report](https://gitlab.miracum.org/miracum/dqa/dqastats/badges/master/coverage.svg)](https://gitlab.miracum.org/miracum/dqa/dqastats/commits/master)
<!-- badges: end -->

The R package 'DQAstats' provides core functionalities to perform data quality assessment (DQA) of electronic health record data (EHR).  

Currently implemented features are:  

* descriptive (univariate) analysis of categorical and continuous variables of a source data system and a target data system
* checks of the extract-transform-load (ETL) pipeline (by comparing distinct values and valid values between the source data system and the target data system)  
* value conformance checks by comparing the resulting statistics to value constraints (given in a meta data repository (MDR))  
* 'atemporal plausibility' checks (multivariate)  
* 'uniqueness plausibility' checks (multivariate)  

The tool provides one main function, `dqa()`, to create a comprehensive PDF document, which presents all statistics and results of the data quality assessment.

Currently supported input data formats / databases:  

* CSV files (via R package [`data.table`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=data.table))  
* PostgreSQL (via R package [`RPostgres`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=RPostgres))  
* ORACLE (via R package [`RJDBC`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=RJDBC))  

## Installation

You can install the development version of `DQAstats` with:

``` r
install.packages("remotes")
remotes::install_github("miracum/dqa-dqastats")
```

Note: A working LaTeX installation is a prerequisite for using this software (e.g. using the R package [`tinytex`](https://yihui.org/tinytex/))!

## Demo Usage

You can test the package without needing to install anything execpt docker. To try out the package follow these instructions:

1. Make sure you have [docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) installed
2. Clone this repo

  ```bash
  git clone https://gitlab.miracum.org/miracum/dqa/dqastats.git dqastats
  cd dqastats
  ```

3. Run the containerized setup using

  ```bash
  docker-compose up
  ```

4. Go to `./output/` and see the created report.

### Advanced dockerized usage

If you want to use your own docker-compose and .env file(s) you can do this simply by using them in this command:

```bash
docker-compose \
  -f docker-compose_miracum.yml \
  --env-file ../dqastats.env \
  up --build
```

## Configuration

The configuration of data systems, be it CSV files or SQL-based databases, is done with environment variables, which can be set using the base R command `Sys.setenv()`.

A detailed description, which environment variables need to be set for the specific databases can be found [here](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils/blob/master/README.md).

## Example

The following code example is intended to provide a minimal working example on how to apply the DQA tool to data. Example data and a corresponding MDR are provided with the R package *DQAstats* (a working LaTeX installation is a prerequisite for using this software, e.g. by using the R package [`tinytex`](https://yihui.org/tinytex/); please refer to the [DQAstats wiki](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/wiki/Installation) for further installation instructions).  

* Example data: [https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/tree/master/inst/demo_data](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/tree/master/inst/demo_data)  
* Example MDR: [https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/blob/master/inst/demo_data/utilities/MDR/mdr_example_data.csv](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/blob/master/inst/demo_data/utilities/MDR/mdr_example_data.csv)  

```r
# Load library DQAstats:
library(DQAstats)

# Set environment vars to demo files paths:
Sys.setenv("EXAMPLECSV_SOURCE_PATH" = system.file("demo_data",
                                                  package = "DQAstats"))
Sys.setenv("EXAMPLECSV_TARGET_PATH" = system.file("demo_data",
                                                  package = "DQAstats"))
# Set path to utilities folder where to find the mdr and template files:
utils_path <- system.file("demo_data/utilities",
                          package = "DQAstats")

# Execute the DQA and generate a PDF report:
results <- DQAstats::dqa(
  source_system_name = "exampleCSV_source",
  target_system_name = "exampleCSV_target",
  utils_path = utils_path,
  mdr_filename = "mdr_example_data.csv",
  output_dir = "output/"
)

# The PDF report is stored at "./output/"
```

## More Infos

* about MIRACUM: [https://www.miracum.org/](https://www.miracum.org/)
* about the Medical Informatics Initiative: [https://www.medizininformatik-initiative.de/index.php/de](https://www.medizininformatik-initiative.de/index.php/de)

Commit message:

docs: added hints for rocker/verse to readme

README.md, after:

# DQAstats

<!-- badges: start -->
[![R CMD Check via {tic}](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/workflows/R%20CMD%20Check%20via%20{tic}/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/actions)
[![linting](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/workflows/lint/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/actions)
[![test-coverage](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/workflows/test-coverage/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/actions)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/miracum/dqa-dqastats/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/miracum/dqa-dqastats)
[![pipeline status](https://gitlab.miracum.org/miracum/dqa/dqastats/badges/master/pipeline.svg)](https://gitlab.miracum.org/miracum/dqa/dqastats/commits/master)
[![coverage report](https://gitlab.miracum.org/miracum/dqa/dqastats/badges/master/coverage.svg)](https://gitlab.miracum.org/miracum/dqa/dqastats/commits/master)
<!-- badges: end -->

The R package 'DQAstats' provides core functionalities to perform data quality assessment (DQA) of electronic health record data (EHR).  

Currently implemented features are:  

* descriptive (univariate) analysis of categorical and continuous variables of a source data system and a target data system
* checks of the extract-transform-load (ETL) pipeline (by comparing distinct values and valid values between the source data system and the target data system)  
* value conformance checks by comparing the resulting statistics to value constraints (given in a meta data repository (MDR))  
* 'atemporal plausibility' checks (multivariate)  
* 'uniqueness plausibility' checks (multivariate)  

The tool provides one main function, `dqa()`, to create a comprehensive PDF document, which presents all statistics and results of the data quality assessment.

Currently supported input data formats / databases:  

* CSV files (via R package [`data.table`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=data.table))  
* PostgreSQL (via R package [`RPostgres`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=RPostgres))  
* ORACLE (via R package [`RJDBC`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=RJDBC))  

## Installation

You can install the development version of `DQAstats` with:

``` r
install.packages("remotes")
remotes::install_github("miracum/dqa-dqastats")
```

Note: A working LaTeX installation is a prerequisite for using this software (e.g. using the R package [`tinytex`](https://yihui.org/tinytex/))!

:bulb: If you want to run this in a dockerized environment you can use the [`rocker/verse`](https://hub.docker.com/r/rocker/verse/) image which has TeX already installed.

## Demo Usage

You can test the package without needing to install anything execpt docker. To try out the package follow these instructions:

1. Make sure you have [docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) installed
2. Clone this repo

  ```bash
  git clone https://gitlab.miracum.org/miracum/dqa/dqastats.git dqastats
  cd dqastats
  ```

3. Run the containerized setup using

  ```bash
  docker-compose up
  ```

4. Go to `./output/` and see the created report.

### Advanced dockerized usage

If you want to use your own docker-compose and .env file(s) you can do this simply by using them in this command:

```bash
docker-compose \
  -f docker-compose_miracum.yml \
  --env-file ../dqastats.env \
  up --build
```

## Configuration

The configuration of data systems, be it CSV files or SQL-based databases, is done with environment variables, which can be set using the base R command `Sys.setenv()`.

A detailed description, which environment variables need to be set for the specific databases can be found [here](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils/blob/master/README.md).

## Example

The following code example is intended to provide a minimal working example on how to apply the DQA tool to data. Example data and a corresponding MDR are provided with the R package *DQAstats* (a working LaTeX installation is a prerequisite for using this software, e.g. by using the R package [`tinytex`](https://yihui.org/tinytex/); please refer to the [DQAstats wiki](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/wiki/Installation) for further installation instructions).  

* Example data: [https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/tree/master/inst/demo_data](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/tree/master/inst/demo_data)  
* Example MDR: [https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/blob/master/inst/demo_data/utilities/MDR/mdr_example_data.csv](https://github.com/miracum/dqa-dqastats/blob/master/inst/demo_data/utilities/MDR/mdr_example_data.csv)  

```r
# Load library DQAstats:
library(DQAstats)

# Set environment vars to demo files paths:
Sys.setenv("EXAMPLECSV_SOURCE_PATH" = system.file("demo_data",
                                                  package = "DQAstats"))
Sys.setenv("EXAMPLECSV_TARGET_PATH" = system.file("demo_data",
                                                  package = "DQAstats"))
# Set path to utilities folder where to find the mdr and template files:
utils_path <- system.file("demo_data/utilities",
                          package = "DQAstats")

# Execute the DQA and generate a PDF report:
results <- DQAstats::dqa(
  source_system_name = "exampleCSV_source",
  target_system_name = "exampleCSV_target",
  utils_path = utils_path,
  mdr_filename = "mdr_example_data.csv",
  output_dir = "output/"
)

# The PDF report is stored at "./output/"
```

## More Infos

* about MIRACUM: [https://www.miracum.org/](https://www.miracum.org/)
* about the Medical Informatics Initiative: [https://www.medizininformatik-initiative.de/index.php/de](https://www.medizininformatik-initiative.de/index.php/de)
